---
title: Video Search Solutions
sidebar:
  order: 3
---

import ThemedDiagram from "@components/ThemedDiagram.astro";

## 3.1 Existing Solutions

TwelveLabs provides an end-to-end video search and understanding solution,
powered by multimodal embedding and video understanding models. MomentsLab also
provides a similar solution, though their approach relies primarily on
AI-powered metadata extraction rather than multimodal semantic embeddings, which
limits the types of queries users can perform.

<ThemedDiagram src='simplified_architecture.png' alt='Kubrick Search' />

Enterprise solutions like those offered by TwelveLabs and MomentsLab offer
active support, are more fully-featured, and offer integrations with other tools
like Premiere Pro. However, these solutions are managed, which means less
control over and visibility into the data pipeline. For teams that want to build
and optimize a use-case-specific product utilizing an existing search platform,
this can create unnecessary dependencies on external architecture and customer
support.

Users are also required to store their entire video library on these platforms,
which may not be desirable for use cases where data privacy or cost minimization
is a priority. Tight coupling with these platforms can also result in vendor
lock-in. Given that multimodal embedding models are rapidly evolving, teams may
prefer a more modular solution that allows for relatively easy future migration.

Given this gap in the market, we built Kubrick for teams who need more control
over their data and architecture but don't have the resources to build a
semantic video search platform from scratch. Kubrick provides essential
functionality without extraneous features while maintaining a modular
architecture that helps teams stay future-proof and avoid vendor lock-in.

## 3.2 Introducing Kubrick

Kubrick’s solution is a video ingestion and search pipeline designed for
developers who want to enhance their applications with semantic video search
while retaining full ownership of their video data. Its easy-to-deploy, and its
easy-to-use API strips away the complexity of large enterprise systems by
focusing on the core challenge: accurate and efficient retrieval of relevant
video content. By intentionally trading off the broader feature set of a full
video RAG platform, Kubrick remains flexible enough to adapt to a wide range of
use cases.

### 3.2.1 Use Cases

#### 3.2.1.1 General

Consider an organization with a large library of training videos looking to make
them instantly accessible to staff on demand. Without Kubrick, they might rely
on keyword search, hoping users know the exact title or metadata to find the
right content. With Kubrick, the organization can ensure their staff can quickly
access the right videos when they need them through its semantic search
capabilities.

#### 3.2.1.2 Security and Scalability

A law firm stores thousands of hours of recorded depositions, hearings, and
compliance training sessions. Lawyers and compliance officers often need to
search across these recordings for key statements or evidence tied to specific
cases. Kubrick enables precise, context-aware search directly within their
secure AWS environment, maintaining control of sensitive data . The serverless
model handles unpredictable query loads, like during a high-profile case or
regulatory audit, without requiring constant infrastructure oversight.

#### 3.2.1.3 Copyright Compliance

A video sharing site needs to ensure that user-submitted content does not
contain copyrighted material from its library of licensed shows. With Kubrick’s
multimodal search, compliance teams can check for matches using a single frame
from a video, a short audio sample or clip of dialogue. Kubrick then scans the
entire content library for semantically similar matches. The site is able to set
the minimum similarity score to prevent false positives while also catching
infringements that simple fingerprinting might miss.
